--- PMC Full Text (PMC13195199) ---

Femoroacetabular impingement syndrome (FAIS) and hip instability are primary causes of hip pain that contribute to the development of osteoarthritis (OA) due to abnormal femoral or acetabular morphology [1–8]. FAIS and hip instability are highly prevalent in young, active adults in whom female patients have a significantly higher incidence of diagnosis and radiographic indicators than males [1, 5, 9, 10]. Although joint space width (JSW) is not a diagnostic tool for FAIS or instability, it has been assessed among pre-arthritic populations of symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. Sex differences in hip JSW have been observed, with females having smaller JSW values compared to males when matched for age and pathology [11–16]. The higher prevalence of FAIS and instability, combined with narrower JSW, suggests a need to further understand the relationship between abnormal femoroacetabular morphology and JSW in females.

The influence of femoroacetabular and spinopelvic orientation on JSW and OA severity has been investigated. Acetabular retroversion has been associated with narrower JSW, while femoral antetorsion may be related to more severe OA scores [17]. Abnormal femoral neck shaft angle (FNSA) can cause augmented compressive forces within the hip joint [18, 19], but this relationship in clinically normal hips remains unclear [20, 21]. Pelvic tilt abnormalities can further exacerbate FAIS and instability symptoms and affect JSW measures on radiographs [22, 23]. Despite these associations, the direct effects of acetabular version (AV), FNSA, and pelvic tilt on JSW across the femoroacetabular articular area in symptomatic females has yet to be established.

The influence of FAIS sub-type and acetabular coverage (AC) on JSW has been studied across various imaging modalities in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients [24–26]. JSW measured on x-rays and MRI in hips with femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) morphology and dysplasia has been negatively associated with AC, determined by measures of LCEA, where greater coverage was related to narrower JSW [24–27]. However, the relationship between x-ray-measured JSW and three-dimensional measures of femoroacetabular orientation and morphology in symptomatic female patients has yet to be determined. Therefore, the aims of this study are two-fold: [1] first, to test the hypothesis that JSW will be greater in hips with hip instability compared with pincer and mixed type FAIS, [2] second, to evaluate how hip morphology and orientation influence JSW in symptomatic females with FAIS and instability.

After IRB approval, retrospective data collection from patients presenting with hip-related pain between January 2018 and July 2024 was performed. Patients were identified by reviewing radiographic data from Stryker HipMap treated by the senior author at a single institution. The inclusion and exclusion criteria were verified for eligible patients via chart review. Inclusion criteria included patients assigned female at birth, aged 14–55 years, who had preoperative Stryker HipMap and standing anterior–posterior (AP) x-rays of the hip, and showed radiographic signs of FAIS or hip instability. Exclusion criteria included prior ipsilateral hip surgery, diagnosed microfracture, trauma, or OA, and JSW < 2.0 mm at the medial, superior, or lateral locations. Female sex was determined using sex assigned at birth due to the nature of this study being focused on bony morphology of the pelvis.

Standing AP pelvic radiographs were evaluated by three-independent reviewers to collect measurements of JSW at the medial, superior, and lateral zones of the weight-bearing portion of the acetabulum (Fig. 1). The measurements for each zone were taken at a 90° angle from the acetabulum to the femoral head at three locations across the weight-bearing portion of the acetabulum: medial (the most medial part of the acetabular sourcil), superior (centre of the superior articular surface of the femoral head), and lateral (the most lateral aspect of the acetabular sourcil that is weight-bearing) [28]. The sequence of x-rays was randomized for each reviewer to prevent order bias, and reviewers were blinded to each patient’s diagnosis group. Pelvic tilt was quantified by measuring the vertical distance between pubic symphysis to sacrococcygeal junction (PSSC) and converting to degrees with sex-specific equations [29, 30].

JSW measurements on standing AP pelvic radiograph at three locations: Medial—the most medial part of the acetabular sourcil, superior—centre of the superior articular surface of the femoral head, and lateral—the most lateral aspect of the acetabular sourcil that is weight-bearing.

All patients in this cohort presented to senior author for symptomatic FAI or hip instability, determined through positive clinical tests (Scour, FADIR, etc.) and radiographic imaging findings. Based on radiographic measurements from the reconstructed computed tomography (CT) scan analysis [31–34], each hip image was classified into one of six pathology groups: mixed FAI, pincer FAI, cam FAI, instability, mild instability, or combined FAI with instability. Pincer FAI was identified as a lesion covering at least 1.5 clock faces on the acetabular rim. Cam FAI was defined as an alpha angle ≥ 50° and a femoral head lesion covering at least one clock face between the 12:00 and 3:00 positions. Pincer and cam lesion presence was determined using data from the reconstructed CT scan analysis. Mixed FAI was defined by the presence of both pincer and cam lesions. Symptomatic instability and mild instability were categorized according to specific ranges for the Tönnis angle, combined version (CV), AC, FNSA, and LCEA, capturing different levels of instability severity. Tönnis angle was measured as the angle between the transverse plane of the pelvis and a line from the lunate surface to the lateral-most, weight-bearing aspect of the acetabulum at the 12 o’clock position. AC was measured as the percentage of the superior femoral head covered by the acetabulum, and CV was defined as the sum of femoral torsion and global AV, consistent with the McKibbin index. Mild instability criteria included ≥ 2 values within the given ranges: Tönnis angle 11°–12°, CV 36°–40°, AC 50%–54%, FNSA 136°–140°, and LCEA 20°–24°. Instability grouping criteria included ≥ 2 values exceeding these thresholds: Tönnis angle > 12°, CV > 40°, AC < 50%, FNSA > 140°, and LCEA < 20°. The combined FAI with instability group met the radiographic criteria for ≥ 1 FAI and instability severity group, in which a majority of these hips showed signs of isolated cam FAI with mild to significant instability.

Statistical analyses were performed using R version 4.4.1 and RStudio 2024.09.0 + 375. Descriptive statistics were reported as means and standard deviations (SDs) for continuous variables and frequencies and percentages (%) for categorical variables. Reliability of multi-reviewer measurements was assessed using intra-class correlation for average fixed raters (ICC3k). Group comparisons for continuous data were performed using linear mixed-effects models with type II ANOVA, with patient random effect and group fixed effect. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons used estimated marginal means (EMMs) with Tukey’s adjustment. Results are presented as mean differences with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and adjusted P-values. Associations between JSW measurements and morphology variables were examined using mixed-effects regression analysis, with random patient effect. Associations are reported as beta-coefficients and P-values. A significance level was set to \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{wasysym}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{upgreek}
\usepackage{mathrsfs}
\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
\begin{document}
$\alpha$\end{document} = .05.

Inter-reviewer reliability for JSW measurements was excellent for the medial (ICC, 0.95), superior (ICC, 0.94), and lateral (ICC, 0.94) locations, and moderate for PSSC (ICC, 0.67). Study cohort included 493 hips (46% left-sided) in 410 female patients who were predominantly White (90%) and non-Hispanic (93%). No significant differences were detected between groups (Table 1).

Patient demographics.

Summary of patient demographics for grouped by morphology type (cam, pincer, mixed, mild instability, instability, FAI with instability). Values are presented as mean (standard deviation). Group differences were evaluated using linear mixed-effect models with type II ANOVA. Statistical significance defined (P < .05).

Analysis of JSW across groups revealed significant differences at the medial, superior, and lateral locations (Table 2). The results of specific pairwise comparisons are summarized in Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table S1.

Joint space width by group and location.

Summary of medial, superior, and lateral JSW measurements grouped by morphology type (cam, pincer, mixed, mild instability, instability, FAI with instability). Values presented as mean (standard deviation). Group differences were evaluated using linear mixed-effect models with type II ANOVA. Statistical significance defined (P < .05).

Joint space width (JSW) pairwise comparisons. Medial, superior, and lateral JSW comparisons across diagnostic groups. Triangles indicate significant differences (direction shows larger group), squares indicate non-significant results, with point size reflecting effect size and colour denoting P-value significance.

Linear regression analysis did not indicate any significant associations between JSW at any location and AV at any clockface [2, 3, 12], femoral torsion (FT), and CV (P > .05). Significant positive associations exist between JSW at all locations and FNSA (Fig. 3), Tönnis angle (Fig. 3), and alpha angles at the 1, 2, and 3 o’clock positions (Supplementary Fig. S1). Alpha angle at the 12 o’clock position was positively correlated with JSW at the medial and lateral locations but not the superior location. AC (Fig. 4) and LCEA (Fig. 4) were negatively associated with JSW at all locations. Beta coefficients for associations with corresponding significance levels are listed in Supplementary Table S2.

Associations between joint space width (JSW) with FNSA and Tönnis angle. Scatterplot (left) visualizes positive association between mean FNSA and medial, superior, and lateral JSW (β, medial = 0.06, superior = 0.04, lateral = 0.03, P < .001 for all). Scatterplot (right) illustrates positive association between Tönnis angle and JSW at medial, superior, and lateral locations (β, medial = 0.07; superior = 0.04; lateral = 0.05; P < .001 for all).

Associations between joint space width (JSW) and measures of acetabular coverage. The scatterplot (left) depicts the negative association between LCEA and JSW at medial, superior, and lateral locations (β, medial = −0.05; superior = −0.03; lateral = −0.03; P < .001 for all). The scatterplot (right) demonstrates the negative association between acetabular coverage and JSW at medial, superior, and lateral locations (β, medial = −0.07; superior = −0.05; lateral = −0.04; P < .001 for all).

Significant differences between groups in morphology measurements were observed for LCEA, Tönnis angle, AC, ASA, alpha angle at all clockfaces [1–3, 12], FT, and FNSA (Table 2). Pelvic tilt (Table 3), AV at all clockfaces [2, 3, 12], and CV (Table 3) were not significantly different between any groups (Fig. 5).

Morphology characteristics by group.

Summary of femoroacetabular morphology measurements by group (cam, pincer, mixed, mild instability, instability, FAI with instability). Values presented as mean (standard deviation). Group differences were evaluated using linear mixed-effect models with type II ANOVA. Statistical significance defined (P < .05).

Pairwise comparisons across diagnostic groups. Pairwise comparisons for LCEA, acetabular coverage, Tönnis angle, and FNSA are shown for pincer, mixed, mild instability, instability, and FAI with instability groups. Triangles indicate significant differences, with direction showing which group is larger, while squares represent non-significant results. Shape size reflects effect size, and colour indicates P-value significance levels.

In this retrospective analysis of hip JSW among symptomatic females with FAIS and instability, we found that JSW at all locations was significantly lower in isolated pincer hips compared to all other pathology groups with the exception of mixed FAI hips, which include a pincer deformity by definition. Medial JSW was significantly greater in the instability and FAI with instability groups compared to the mild instability, cam, and mixed FAI groups. Furthermore, superior JSW was greater among hips with isolated cam FAI compared to the mixed group. JSW at all locations was negatively associated with LCEA and AC, while Tönnis angle and FNSA were positively associated, suggesting a positive association between JSW and hip instability. While AV, FT, and CV were not associated with JSW at any location, JSW was positively associated with alpha angle measurements at the 1, 2, and 3 o’clock positions, consistent with the greater JSW values in the cam versus pincer groups. These findings suggest that femoroacetabular orientation influences JSW in pre-arthritic female hips, as pincer-predominant impingement morphology is associated with decreased JSW, and instability hips are associated with increased JSW.

Several studies have compared JSW between hip pathology groups in symptomatic and asymptomatic populations, using various imaging modalities and grouping techniques. Similar to this study, Kraeutler et al. found that JSW was significantly lower in hips with acetabular overcoverage and higher in hips with undercoverage compared with normal coverage hips in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients [25]. JSW was evaluated using standing AP x-rays at the superomedial and superolateral femoral head regions but excluded the medial aspect of the sourcil [25]. AC was defined using two-dimensional measurements of LCEA and patients were further divided into pathology groups based on medical history, clinical evaluation, radiographic imaging, and intraoperative findings [25]. However, statistical comparisons of JSW between the pincer, cam, mixed, borderline dysplasia, and frank dysplasia groups were not reported. Nishii et al. also demonstrated a significant negative correlation between JSW and LCEA in asymptomatic patients, although no JSW comparisons were performed between different degrees of AC [35]. JSW was measured on supine x-rays at the medial, superior, and lateral regions using automatic detection of the femoral head and the acetabular roof to perform computational measurements [35]. JSW at all locations was lower in females compared to males, and the correlation of LCEA with JSW was observed in both sexes [35]. These findings align with our results regarding the association of LCEA measurements and AC with JSW in symptomatic female hips.

In contrast to our findings of differences in JSW between FAI morphology groups, Steppacher et al. found no significant differences in JSW between symptomatic cam, pincer, and mixed FAI hips on supine AP x-rays [24]. However, in the same study, JSW measured at eight locations on arthrogram MRIs was significantly lower in pincer hips compared to cam and mixed hips at several locations, along with reduced cartilage thickness, suggesting an association between isolated pincer morphology and reduced joint space [24]. The lack of significant differences in JSW between FAI types measured on x-rays may be attributed to the relatively low sample size in their study and the use of supine rather than weight-bearing radiographs [24]. Similarly, Ashwell et al. found significantly lower femoroacetabular cartilage thickness in hips with acetabular overcoverage compared to those with normal or undercoverage, with a stronger negative association in females, suggesting that sex and pincer morphology may influence cartilage degeneration and JSW narrowing [36]. Nehme et al. compared JSW, measured via CT scans, between pincer, cam, and mixed type hips from an asymptomatic population [26]. After adjusting for age and BMI, they found no significant JSW differences between FAI morphology types, but hips with pincer or cam lesions had greater JSW compared to non-FAI hips [26]. FAI morphology groupings were determined by a negative roof-edge angle for pincer morphology and alpha angle > 55° for cam morphology [26]. While some findings regarding JSW differences between FAI morphology types differ from our study, factors such as imaging modality, sample size, patient population, and morphology grouping criteria are likely contributors. However, lower JSW in isolated pincer hips observed on MRI aligns with our findings of reduced JSW across all locations in pincer hips compared to hips with instability and cam morphology.

Femoroacetabular JSW can be influenced by patient factors such as sex, age, height, and symptomology [11–16]. In this study of 493 symptomatic female hips, the influence of patient factors on JSW was reduced as there were no significant differences in patient age, height, weight, or BMI, between pathology groups (Table 1). Spinopelvic orientation can influence the accuracy of JSW measurements on two-dimensional radiographs [37]; therefore, the measurement of pelvic tilt was collected and compared between pathology groups. There were no significant differences between pelvic tilt among any of the pathology groups (Table 3), suggesting that the influence of tilt on x-ray measurement accuracy of JSW was not responsible for the differences in JSW observed between groups. While other studies have used clinical evaluation and x-ray-derived thresholds for alpha angle, LCEA, and acetabular inclination to group hips [24–26, 36], we used a grouping algorithm based on 3D models reconstructed from CT scans and advanced measurement analysis techniques (Fig. 6). Hip instability extent was determined based on several 3D measurements of femoroacetabular orientation and AC, which identified the combined FAI with instability group that displayed radiographic signs of both abnormal, bony impingement morphology and concomitant malrotations. While LCEA as a representation of AC has been well associated with JSW, to our knowledge we are the first to report the influence of 3D-derived measurements of AC, Tönnis angle, AV, FT, FNSA, CV, ASA, and alpha angles on pre-arthritic JSW in female hips.

Radial plot (left) visualizing joint space width (JSW) measurements at the medial, superior, and lateral regions, stratified by group. Boxplot (right) illustrating distribution of JSW measurements for each group at the medial, superior, and lateral locations.

Lower JSW values among hips with pincer morphology are likely due to the increased compressive forces placed on the acetabular labrum and femoroacetabular cartilage that cause reduction in femoroacetabular space. However, narrower JSW in young, active females in this setting should not be interpreted as a sign of OA as no other findings of OA were noted in this young, active cohort. Rather, narrow JSW should alert the provider to the possibility of pincer or mixed type FAI. Conversely, higher JSW values observed in hips with instability and/or concomitant cam morphology, are likely the result of labral and cartilage hypertrophy that develops as a compensatory mechanism for acetabular undercoverage and femoroacetabular malorientation. These findings have implications for females with hip instability as elevated JSW may be another radiographic indicator of instability, as higher JSW could be indicative of more translational motion, although further research is warranted to confirm this hypothesis.

This study had several limitations, including imaging modality, single time-point collection of JSW, and absence of an asymptomatic control group or male hips. Measures of JSW were collected on standing AP view plain radiographs, although this measurement system is a widely used clinical tool, imaging modalities such as MRI or CT can provide more accurate quantification of JSW at a greater number of locations within the femoroacetabular joint. However, the lack of weight-bearing in these studies, typically performed supine, may confound results, and therefore we elected to proceed with weight-bearing radiographs for measurements. The ease and efficiency of interpreting standing AP radiographs also allows for increased generalizability of the study findings. JSW measures were collected at a single pre-surgical time point, with no long-term follow-up to assess changes with FAI or hip instability progression. Lastly, the lack of a control group of asymptomatic hips limits our ability to draw conclusions about the comparison of JSW with asymptomatic populations. Despite these limitations, our study demonstrated correlations between JSW and 3D femoroacetabular morphology and orientation, including clinically normal ranges, providing insight into joint space characteristics. The cohort for this study was limited to patients assigned female at birth to remove the influence of sex differences in JSW and focus on the female hip across pre-arthritic pathologies. However, the exclusion of male hips prevents direct conclusions about JSW differences among FAI types and instability groups in symptomatic male patients.

Symptomatic female hips with FAI and instability showed significant differences in JSW between hips with pincer morphology and radiographic signs of instability, supporting our hypothesis that instability is associated with greater JSW and pincer FAI is associated with lower JSW. JSW was negatively associated with 3D measurements of AC and LCEA at the 12 o’clock position, and there were positive associations with FNSA, Tönnis angle, and alpha angles. Additionally, there were no significant associations between JSW and AV, FT, or CV. These findings suggest that FAI morphology type and instability influence JSW in symptomatic female hips and highlight the need for future research to measure JSW over time in hips with FAI and instability to clarify their role in the progression of hip pathology.